xpacd-basic-dep Forbidden
pacda-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
pacda-basic-dep-modifier Forbidden
pacda-disable-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
pacda-disable-no-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
pacda-disable-no-pick-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
autda-disable-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
autda-disable-no-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
autda-disable-no-pick-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
autda-success-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
autda-fpac-success-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
autda-failure-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
autda-success-pick-basic-dep-modifier Forbidden
autda-success-no-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
autda-fpac-success-pick-basic-dep-modifier Forbidden
autda-fpac-success-no-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
autda-failure-basic-dep-modifier Forbidden
autda-fpac-failure-pick-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
autda-fpac-failure-pick-basic-dep-modifier Forbidden
autda-fpac-basic-dep-branch Forbidden
autda-fpac-pick-basic-dep-branch Forbidden
pauth1-autda-success-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
pauth1-autda-success-no-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
pauth1-autda-success-pick-basic-dep-modifier Forbidden
pauth1-autda-failure-pick-basic-dep-modifier Forbidden
pauth1-autda-failure-no-basic-dep-modifier Allowed
pauth1-autda-failure-basic-dep-pointer Forbidden
