# uoaim7

`uoaim7` is a tool that synthesizes cat expressions and statements from
constrained English prose descriptions. Its purpose is to validate that
hand-written ordering-constraint prose in the Arm ARM and similar documents
matches the formal memory model. Many memory-model prose descriptions in the
Arm ARM are already autogenerated via tools like `miaou7`; `uoaim7` targets the
remaining hand-written descriptions.

## Input format

The tool expects input in _constrained_ natural language that follows a fixed structure. As the name suggests, `uoaim7` is a "reverse `miaou7`"; a good approximation of its accepted input is "whatever `miaou7` can generate".

`uoaim7` currently supports two description types, "definitions" and "hardware requirements", each mapping to a specific cat statement. Both formats embed cat expressions as subclauses, so we describe the shared expression syntax first, then the "definitions" and "hardware requirements" formats.

### Expressions

Cat expressions are expressed as lists of constraints, combined via conjunction or disjunction. For example, the structure:

```
all of the following apply:
o [CONSTRAINT_1]
o [CONSTRAINT_2]
o one of the following applies:
- [CONSTRAINT_3]
- all of the following apply:
++ [CONSTRAINT_4]
++ ...
o [CONSTRAINT_5]
o ...
```

is interpreted as the logical formula `CONSTRAINT_1 ∧ CONSTRAINT_2 ∧ (CONSTRAINT_3 ∨ (CONSTRAINT_4 ∧ ...)) ∧ CONSTRAINT_5 ∧ ...`. We use distinct bullet symbols (instead of indentation) to mark nesting, because the prose is typically extracted from PDFs before being fed to `uoaim7`, and that process drops indentation. Besides bullet points, the format closely matches how `miaou7` pretty-prints cat expressions.

Constraints themselves can be of several types:

- Effect constraints, for example "E1 is a Memory Write Effect". These are parsed based on `./herd/libdir/catdefinitions.tex`.
- Relation constraints, for example "E1 is Coherence-before E2". These are parsed based on `./herd/libdir/catdefinitions.tex`.
- Transitive chains, for example "There exists a chain of Intrinsic Data Dependency or Intrinsic Control Dependency from E3 to E2.", which translates to `(iico_data | iico_ctrl)+`.
- Program order triples, i.e. phrases of the form "E1 is in program order between E2 and E3".
- Main clause + subclauses, i.e. phrases of the form "[CONSTRAINT] (given that [CONSTRAINT], and [CONSTRAINT], ..., and [CONSTRAINT])", where `[CONSTRAINT]` can be any of the above. These can be used to express inline logical conjunction of constraints.
- Negation, for example "It is not the case that [CONSTRAINT]", where `[CONSTRAINT]` can be any of the above.

Note that the tool assumes distinct effects are mentioned using _distinct names within a list of conjunctions_. For example, the tool expects an expression like `(r1; r2) & (r3; r4)` to be described as something like:

```
* E1 is r1-before E3
* E3 is r2-before E2
* E1 is r3-before E4
* E4 is r4-before E2
```

In particular, the "middle" effect between r1 and r2 has a different name (E3) from the one between r3 and r4 (E4). This format is consistent with the way `miaou7` generates prose descriptions of such expressions.
Note that `uoaim7` makes no such asssumption when it comes to disjunctions. Thus in particular, a description of the expression `(r1; r2) | (r3; r4)` is allowed to reuse the same name for the two effects witnessing the `;` sequence, because each branch of the disjunction is processed independently.

### Definitions

"Definitions" are prose descriptions of top-level `let`/`let rec` bindings in cat.
The expected format largely mirrors `miaou7` output.

Roughly, the format is:

```
[description of relation between two effects] if [expression]
```

where `[expression]` is expected to follow the format described above.

For example, given the prose description of `pick-data-dep`:

```
There is a Pick Data dependency from an Effect E1 to an Effect E2 if all of the following apply:
* E1 is an Explicit Memory Read Effect.
* There is a Pick Basic dependency from E1 to E3.
* E3 affects the data value written by E2.
* One of the following applies:
** There is an Intrinsic Data Dependency from E3 to E2.
** There is an Intrinsic Control Dependency from E3 to E2.
** There exists a chain of Intrinsic Data Dependency or Intrinsic Control Dependency from E3 to E2.
* E2 is an Explicit Memory Write Effect.
* It is not the case that E1 and E2 are generated by the same instruction.
```

We can then run:

```sh
$ uoaim7 --def pick_data_dep.txt
let pick-data-dep = [Exp & R]; ~same-instance & (pick-basic-dep; [DATA]; (iico_data | iico_ctrl | (iico_data | iico_ctrl)+)); [Exp & W]
```

More examples of valid input files can be found in `test/data/*.txt`, and `test/run.t`.

### Hardware requirements

"Hardware requirements" map to `empty` (or `irreflexive`) statements in cat.
They are written as implications, with a "premise" part and a "conclusion" part, both of which must be formatted as a cat expression.

Currently the tool is tailored to support hardware requirements as written in the Concurrency Readers Guide, so it expects the "conclusion" part to follow a specific format. Namely, either:

```
if [premise] then [conclusion-part-1] is not architecturally allowed to [conclusion-part-2].
```

or:

```
if [premise] then the hardware is not architecturally Allowed to let [conclusion].
```

Optionally, hardware requirements can be prefixed with the phrase "This places a requirement on the hardware that", in line with the Concurrency Readers Guide.

For example, for a file `req.txt`:

```
This places a requirement on the hardware that if all of the following apply:
* the Implicit Instruction Memory Read Effect (c) appears in program order before the Implicit Instruction Memory Read Effect (d).
* Effect (d) is IC-before the IC Effect (m).
* the DSB FULL Effect (n) appears in program order between Effect (m) and the Explicit Memory Write Effect (b).
then Effect (c) is not architecturally Allowed to Read-from Effect (b).
```

We get:

```sh
$ uoaim7 --hwreq req.txt
empty [Imp & Instr & R]; rf^-1 & (po; [Imp & Instr & R]; IC-after; [IC]; po; [dsb.full]; po); [Exp & W]
```

Or equivalently, as an `irreflexive` test:

```sh
$ uoaim7 --hwreq --irrefl req.txt
irreflexive [Imp & Instr & R]; po; [Imp & Instr & R]; IC-after; [IC]; po; [dsb.full]; po; [Exp & W]; rf; [Imp & Instr & R]
```

More examples can be found in the test suite, in `test/data/miaouified-hw-reqs/*.txt`.

## Implementation details

### Parsing logic

The tool parses constrained prose into `Structure.t`, a tree of constraints, using `angstrom` parser combinators. `angstrom` was preferred over parser generators like `menhir` because of its backtracking support, and parser combinators can be easily composed as first-class OCaml values, providing a degree of flexibility that makes it a good fit for natural-language parsing.

### Translation logic

After parsing the overall structure of the input text document, each constraint string gets translated into a structured constraint representation `Constraint.t` that only mentions effect identifiers and cat expressions.

To translate a textual description of a relation such as “There is an Intrinsic Control Dependency from E1 to E2” into the corresponding cat expression `iico_ctrl`, the tool reverses the mapping encoded in `catdefinitions.tex`. It uses Levenshtein distance to match the prose fragment against the `.tex` definitions. This reverse matching approach comes from @maranget's original prototype.

Complex constraint phrases like "There exists a chain of Intrinsic Data Dependency or Intrinsic Control Dependency from E3 to E2.", which contain relation names as well as connective structure, get translated into equivalet cat expressions via a mix of parsing combinators and reverse string matching.

A term of type `Constraint.t` is of two kinds:

- Effect predicates, representing information like "Effect E1 is in set M".
- Relation predicates, representing information like "E1 and E2 are related by `po & same-loc`".

Following parsing, the resulting constraint structure of type `Constraint.t Structure.t` is turned into a cat expression by the reconstruction algorithm. The core reconstruction works on conjunctions: it builds a relation graph from `Rel` constraints, collects `Set` constraints per endpoint, then repeatedly applies series reductions (compose edges with `;`) and parallel reductions (intersect edges with `&`) until the graph collapses to a single edge.

To handle disjunctions, the algorithm first collapses each `Or` into a single constraint before the graph reduction. To do so, each branch of the disjunction is reconstructed independently to a set or relation expression, then the results are combined with union (`|`) into a single `Constraint.t` that can be treated conjunctively by the series/parallel reducer.

Detailed logs of this process can be observed by passing the `--debug` flag:

```sh
$ uoaim7 --hwreq --irrefl req.txt --debug
```

## Converting from PDF to plain text

In case the prose to convert to cat is embedded in a PDF file, you can try the
following method to extract it to plain text.

On a MacBook Pro:

1. Open PDF with Acrobat reader, save as Text in A.txt.
2. Change `\r` into `\n` with `awk -v RS='\r' -v ORS='\n' '1' `
3. Convert to asciii with `iconv -c -f utf-8 -t ascii//TRANSLIT`
4. Get Rid of headers and footers: `awk -f headers.awk`.
5. Extract definitions in the current directory
   with the extractdefs tool: `extractdefs7 -o . D.txt`

On Unix, from the text file `A.txt` produced by acrobat reader on an
Apple machine:

1. Translate CR to LF : `recode  CR..cl < A.txt | dos2unix > B.txt`.
2. Get rid of utf8 `iconv -c -f utf-8 -t ascii//TRANSLIT < B.txt > C.txt`.
3. Get Rid of headers and footers: `awk -f headers.awk <C.txt > D.txt`.
4. Extract definitions in the current directory
   with the extractdefs tool: `extractdefs7 -o . D.txt`

## Build dictionary

Requires `pandoc`

```sh
./build-dict.sh > dict.ml
```
